---
title: "How Language shapes the way we Think"
date: 2023-07-18T09:45:41+05:30
draft: false
---
 Charlemagne, Holy Roman emperor, said, "To have a second language is to have a second soul" -- strong statement that language crafts reality. But on the other hand, Shakespeare said, "What's in a name? A rose by any other name would smell as sweet." Well, that suggests that maybe language doesn't craft reality.
 Do the languages we speak shape the way we see the world, the way we think, and the way we live our lives? Do people who speak different languages think differently simply because they speak different languages? Does learning new languages change the way you think?
I'll be speaking to you using language. We can transmit really complicated thoughts to one another. So what I'm doing right now is, I'm making sounds with my mouth those are creating air vibrations in the air. Those air vibrations are traveling to you, they're hitting your eardrums, and then your brain takes those vibrations from your eardrums and transforms them into thoughts. I hope.
I hope that's happening.  Here language is a tool to express my  thoughts across minds. I can put a bizarre new idea in your mind right now. I could say, "Imagine a Forest have  club where Dinosaurs are Dancers Bartenders are lions  and elephants are bouncers."
Now, if everything has gone relatively well in your life so far, you probably haven't had that thought before.
But now I've just made you think it, through language.
There are about 7,000 languages spoken around the world. And all the languages differ from one another in all kinds of ways. Some languages have different sounds, they have different vocabularies, and they also have different structures -- very importantly, different structures. 
Based on collected data around the world: from China, Greece, Chile, Indonesia, Russia, and Aboriginal Australia. who speak different languages do indeed think differently and that even flukes of grammar can profoundly affect how we see the world.
So let me tell you about some examples.
 I'll start with an example from an Aboriginal community in Australia. These are the Kuuk Thaayorre people. What's cool about Kuuk Thaayorre is, in Kuuk Thaayorre, they don't use words like "left" and "right," and instead, everything is in cardinal directions: north, south, east and west.
 And when I say everything, I really mean everything. You would say something like, "Oh, there's a pen on your southwest hand." Or, "Move your book to the north-northeast a little bit." In fact, the way that you say "hello" in Kuuk Thaayorre is you say, "Which way are you going?" And the answer should be, "North-northeast in the far distance. How about you?"
 They stay oriented better than we used to think humans could. We used to think that humans were worse than other creatures because of some biological excuse: "Oh, we don't have magnets in our beaks or in our scales." No; if your language and your culture trains you to do it, actually, you can do it. There are humans around the world who stay oriented really well.
 I want you all to close your eyes for a second and point southeast.
Imagine you are in a desert or forest who have no idea of Directions .if you know this it is a life saving trick
 This is a big difference in cognitive ability across languages, right? Where one group -- very distinguished group like you guys -- doesn't know which way is which, but in another group, I could ask a five-year-old and they would know.
There are also really big differences in how people think about time. if i gave  pictures of mine  at different ages. And if I ask you to organize time, you lay it out from left to right. This has to do with writing direction. If you were a speaker of Hebrew or Arabic, you might do it going in the opposite direction, from right to left.
This Kuuk Thaayorre people  don't use words like "left" and "right." Let me give you hint. When we sat people facing south, they organized time from left to right. When we sat them facing north, they organized time from right to left. When we sat them facing east, time came towards the body. What's the pattern? East to west, right? So for them, time doesn't actually get locked on the body at all, it gets locked on the landscape. So for me, if I'm facing this way, then time goes this way, and if I'm facing this way, then time goes this way. I'm facing this way, time goes this way -- very egocentric of me to have the direction of time chase me around every time I turn my body. For the Kuuk Thaayorre, time is locked on the landscape. It's a dramatically different way of thinking about time.
Here's another really smart human trick. Suppose I ask you how many tags are there. Well, I bet I know how you'd solve that problem if you solved it. You went, "One, two, three, four, five, six, seven, eight." You counted them. You named each one with a number, and the last number you said was the number of tags.  A little linguistic trick. Well, some languages don't do this, because some languages don't have exact number words. In fact, people who speak these languages don't count, and they have trouble keeping track of exact quantities. So, for example, if I ask you to match this number of tags to the same number of toastmasters, you would be able to do that by counting. But folks who don't have that linguistic trick can't do that.
Assume  due to the numbers we explored a mathematical world from small buildings to rockets .you can't imagine our lifes without numbers.
Languages also differ in how they divide up the color spectrum -- the visual world. Some languages have lots of words for colors, some have only a couple words, "light" and "dark."  So, for example, in English, there's a word for blue that covers all of the colours, but in Russian, there isn't a single word. Instead, Russian speakers have to differentiate between light blue, "goluboy," and dark blue, "siniy." So Russians have this lifetime of experience of, in language, distinguishing these two colors. When we test people's ability to perceptually discriminate these colors, what we find is that Russian speakers are faster across this linguistic boundary.
 In English, the form of the verb in a sentence tells whether it describes a past or present event (Mary walks vs. Mary walked). Hopi doesn't require that; instead, the forms of its verbs tell how the speaker came to know the information,  Hopi speakers and English speakers think about events differently, with Hopi speakers focusing more on the source of the information and English speakers focusing more on the time of the event.
Languages have all kinds of structural quirks. Lots of languages have grammatical gender; every noun gets assigned a gender, often masculine or feminine. And these genders differ across languages. So, for example, the sun is feminine in German but masculine in Spanish, and the moon, the reverse. Could this actually have any consequence for how people think? if you ask German and Spanish speakers to, say, describe a bridge, German speakers are more likely to say bridges are "beautiful," "elegant" and stereotypically feminine words. Whereas Spanish speakers will be more likely to say they're "strong" or "long," these masculine words.
Languages also differ in how they describe events, right? You take an event like this, an accident. In English, it's fine to say, "He broke the vase." In a language like Spanish, you might be more likely to say, "The vase broke," or, "The vase broke itself." If it's an accident, you wouldn't say that someone did it. 
Now, this has consequences. So, people who speak different languages will pay attention to different things, depending on what their language usually requires them to do. So we show the same accident to English speakers and Spanish speakers, English speakers will remember who did it, because English requires you to say, "He did it; he broke the vase." Whereas Spanish speakers might be less likely to remember who did it if it's an accident, but they're more likely to remember that it was an accident. They're more likely to remember the intention. So, two people watch the same event, witness the same crime, but end up remembering different things about that event. This has implications, of course, for eyewitness testimony. It also has implications for blame and punishment.
Now, I've given you a few examples of how language can profoundly shape the way we think
Every language seems to have its own way of conceptualizing and describing certain things, even with quantifiable concepts. 
"The limits of my language mean the limits of my world." 



